>> Yes, your biological heart
is doing more than you may have
imagined.
In recent years,
neurocardiologists
have made an exciting discovery.
They found that the heart has
its own independent nervous
system.
This complex system is referred
to as the brain in the heart.
It sends signals
to the brain that
are transmitted to the amygdala,
the emotional processing
center.
To the thalamus,
which synchronizes
as our cortical functions and
affect our higher brain centers
that are responsible for clarity
of thought and decision making.
The brain also send
signals to the heart,
mostly to raise or
lower our heart rate.
But when researchers look
at the information traffic
in the body, it's clearly
seen that the heart
sends a lot more information
to the brain than it receives.
Brain function is critically
dependent on this information.
Heart and brain are in
constant communication.
The heart is doing
most of the talking.
Here's another interesting
scientific fact.
The heart is an
electrical organ,
producing by far
the strongest source
of rhythmic bioelectricity.
This energy goes to
every cell in your body.
Your heart produces
enough electrical energy
to create a magnetic field
surrounding your body in 360
degrees, extending beyond the
skin out into space, measurable
about 3 feet outside your body.
>> Magnetic fields
contain information.
We imprint our
own magnetic field
through what we're
actually feeling,
the emotions that we're feeling.
But then it gets even
more interesting.
It's like your magnetic
fields relate to one another
they exchange information.
So how is my field affecting
your field right now,
and your field affecting mine?
>> And a great analogy
for this is cell phones.
The way this works
is our phone is
generating an electromagnetic
field, in this case.
And the magnetic
field is carrying
that information, our
voice or the photo
or the text message or whatever.
So then when I talk about the
magnetic field of the heart,
it's the same thing.
So we can fairly easily measure
that not only are we radiating
these magnetic fields, but
our nervous systems are
tuned to these fields
and receive information
from others.
So what this means
is that there is
a very real energetic or
magnetic communication
system going on between
people all the time.
And another part of the reason
that I think the understanding
the energetic communication
that goes on between people
is so important is
in miscommunication.
One of the greatest sources
of stress between people
is when you might
be saying one thing
but our field is
saying something else.
And that leaves them with a
disconnect or a confusion.
Because our words
said one thing,
but we might have been
sending another signal
through our energetic system.
>> When our heart-brain-body
communication is working well,
we can enter a state of
being in sync with ourself,
a state of higher coherence.
So what is coherence and
why is this important?
Coherence is a healthy
measurable state.
The term refers to the
co-operative alignment
between heart,
mind, and emotions.
Higher coherence is good for us.
It's a healthy state
that regenerates us.
It directly contributes to
increased emotional balance,
stability, access to intuition,
and improved mental functions,
such as the ability to
focus, mental clarity,
bigger-picture thinking,
memory, improved reaction times,
and coordination.
Coherence is often
triggered by an experience
of regenerative uplifting
emotions, like those long
associated with the
qualities of the heart,
such as love, care, kindness,
appreciation, and compassion.
And it helps us generate more
of these heart qualities.
Coherence can be
measured using technology
that measures the beat-to-beat
changes in the rhythmic beating
patterns of the heart, like
HeartMath's Inner Balance
Trainer.
This is called heart rate
variability analysis.
It's a measure of the naturally
occurring beat-to-beat changes
in heart rhythm.
It serves as a critical method
for gauging human health.
>> Coherence is a broad term in
that it embraces many things,
like synchronization,
entrainment,
and a lot of other terms
that we use in physics.
But coherence always implies
that the parts of a system,
like within our body, for
example, are communicating.
There has to be communication.
And that those subsystems, or
different parts of our body,
are working together in
a harmonious and energy
efficient way.
>> Well, coherence is
something that's called,
actually medically,
psychophysiological coherence,
which means it's both
physical and psychological.
Physically what's happening when
we're in a high coherent state,
is all the major
body systems are
synchronized to an
ordered rhythmic beating
pattern of the heart.
That's things like respiration,
digestion, immune system
response, hormonal response,
and brain function.
They all sync up.
And when that happens,
it's a very healthy state.
And it's also a high
performance state.
You know, all the systems
are working together well.
Less energy is being wasted,
reaction speed times improve,
visual field changes.
All of that happens when we get
in this high coherent state.
>> So that improves not
only our mental functions,
but also our autonomic
nervous system,
which controls 90% of the
body's involuntary functions,
from hormonal to immune response
to how we sleep, digestion.
If we can get all those
systems in sync or coherent,
then we have better
health, better wellness,
as well as more clarity and
better connections and feelings
with ourselves and others.
>> So we can navigate through
these stressful external
situations with much
greater ease and composure.
So that what's
happening in the outside
doesn't cause us as much stress
because our internal systems
are in sync and coherent.
>> Now here's the
psychological part.
Coherence is naturally
triggered when
we are experiencing a
regenerative uplifting
emotion, like the
qualities of the heart.
When I'm more
appreciative, I'm going
to be naturally more coherent.
When I'm being caring to someone
rather than judging them,
I'm going to be
naturally more coherent.
>> It's really the body's
natural resonant state.
And love, care, compassion,
these heart qualities
are like oil for the system.
They help create that state.
>> Stressful emotions create a
chaotic heart rate variability
pattern.
Lower coherence.
Incoherent heart rhythms created
by our emotional responses
start to shut down some of our
higher thinking capacities.
This can cloud our judgment,
ability to discern,
and make good choices.
Sustained regenerative
emotions create
a smooth and ordered pattern,
which indicates high coherence.
When people are feeling
sincere regenerative
heart-based emotions, such
as love, appreciation,
and compassion, their heart
rhythm pattern naturally
becomes more coherent.
These coherent heart
rhythms send signals
to the brain that open up
our higher brain functions.
We get smarter.
You see, your brain is a big
winner when we're coherent.
Practicing heart coherence
for even a few minutes
lifts your vibration, making
it possible for your heart's
intuition to inform your
attitudes, discernments,
and choices.
You don't have to walk
around in perfect coherence.
The carryover effect gives you
enough operational coherence
to support balance,
emotional poise, and flow
in your day-to-day
communications and activities.
You can reboot using a heart
coherence technique any time,
your energy starts to
drop during the day.
Through this
experience, you will
learn how to shift from
incoherence to coherence,
and gain better health, mental
clarity, and the ability
to feel better emotionally.
It's not as hard
as you might think.
And in the next
chapter, you will
learn a simple technique
that will help you make
this shift anytime, anywhere.